# Game Jam

Games are an area that have been heavily influence by developments in AI and ML. In this assignment, write a short paper on a game that you like that has been influenced by the evolution of AI. It should be an old enough game to have been influenced by several types of computer processing systems. A good example is Chess or Go, but also take a look at video games like pong or Pac-Man. Write an essay that discusses the game's past, present, and AI future.

#Artificial Intelligence in FPS Games

I played many first person shooter (FPS) games in my teenage years and often played against (and with) the in game AI. I usually set the bot difficulty to easy just for my own practice, however the higher difficulty bots were clearly very intelligent players. 

Quake 3 is an old FPS game from the 90's that I downloaded and played because it was a cheap game to buy and easy to run on my parent's graphics card. The game is fast twitch and "sweaty" as the players move very quickly throughout a fighting arena trying to eliminate each other. The AI bots in this game containd an "area awareness system" to haelp them figure out the best way to navigate the arena by using both pre-learned information about the arena and real-time information about what's happening in the moment of the game. This is much more effective that using a simple waypoint graph and is essentially a precursor to "navigation mesh" (an abstract data structure used to aid in pathfinding through complicated spaces. it is a collection of two dimensional convex polygons that define which areas of an environment are traversably by agents.)

Half-Life is another classic FPS from the 90's that I also downloaded because it was a cheap game. It is a classic singleplayer FPS that tells the story of a scientist who's research experiment went horribly wrong. The AI in this game uses a technique known as "Finite State Machines" (FSM), where characters are designed to operate in distinct states (e.g. idle, chase the player, attack enemies, etc.), and logic is provided for them to transition between those states based on what's happing in that moment of the game. For example, if a character is idle and it spots an enemy, then it goes into an attacking state. Further, if the character is an unarmed scientist and it spots an enemy, then it goes into a fleeing state where it runs away from the enemy.

FEAR is an FPS game from the 2000's that I never had the pleasure of playing, however it adopted a hybrid FSM model and an important AI technique called automated planning. Automated planning involves mapping out the high-level goals a character might want to accomplish, and then designing actions that help it acheive those goals. A planner will string sequences of usefull actions togteher into a plan to achieve that goal. They used a Goal Oriented Action Planner (GOAP), which would devise a goal (e.g. rushing into cover, laying down suppressing fire,etc.) and then translate the plan actions into specific behaviours for the FSM to execute. Similarly, other games have used a Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning, where the AI creates macros of good actions that can be used in sequence.

Halo 2 was a game that I sadly did not play much of, although I enjoyed every second of it whenever I visited a friend that had an xbox. Halo 2 used a technique known as "Behaviour Trees". In a FSM, there is a web of possible paths that can occur between all the state connections, however in behaviour tree, everything starts from the root and follows a tree shape of possibly baths based on key decisions or information about the game. This is great because it can quickly determine if actions or important or not for a character. For example, when Master Chief is barreling towards an enemy in a Warthog jeep, the NPCs know they need to only focus on the ‘vehicular combat’ portion of their behaviour tree. Also, the behaviour tree could be interrupted by "Stimulus Behaviours," where the tree could be interrupted in order to force a hard change in behaviour. For exaple, the Grunts will begin to panic when the more advanced Elites are taken out by the player.

Call of Duty 2 was one of the notable first installments of the historic CoD franchise. I put a lot of hour and some serious work into CoD 4, MW2 and Black Ops... probably a bit too much of my time was spent in CoD lobbies. Regardless, CoD 2 was before my time but was notable for the gameplay technique it implemented called "barks". Barks are the small lines of dialogue that a character can utter at specific times based on some logic about the current game state. Basically, the carracheter says a line of dialogue when a series of rules and conditions are found to be true in the game. For example, bots will call out enemy positions relative to where you are and to take cover or push forward. Importantly, the logic also was encoded for how and why any one particular line was goingto be uttered, as well as cooldowns and other logic to ensure that the computer doesn't repeat the same line over and over again.

Finally, Left 4 Dead was a classic zombie game that I wish I would have played more. On the other hand, I played a lot of nNazi zombies in CoD which is definitely one of my all time favorite games, so I don't think I missed out too much. In Left 4 Dead, the game uses "Director" AI, which uses a FSM (much like Half-Life) to change the pace of the game by spawning zombies, setting targets for them to focus on, and triggering boss enemies. The game modeled a player's strees based on the damage they're receiving and how close the zomies are when they're killed. The Director aims to keep players engaged by taking the game through 3 stages: 1. Build Up, where the game continually ratchets up the stress and pressure by increasing the number of zombie spawns, 2. Peak, where the maximum amount of stress is endured by the players, and 3. Cool down, where the game lets it foot off the gas and gives the player respite from the stress and a moment to relax and reload. The speed at which the Director changes the pace of the game also can change based on how you are playing the game.
